PEP 707: A simplified signature for __exit__ and __aexit__ (#3018)
python/peps: pep-0707.rst

Internally, the interpreter no longer represents exceptions as a triplet.
This was removed for the handled exception in 3.11 
[https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/30122] and
for the raised exception in 3.12
[https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/101607]. As a consequence,
several APIs that expose the triplet were deprecated in favour of
simpler alternatives:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: auto

   * - 
     - Deprecated
     - Alternative
   * - Get handled exception (Python)
     - ``sys.exc_info()``
     - ``sys.exception()``
   * - Get handled exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_GetExcInfo()``
     - ``PyErr_GetHandledException()``
   * - Set handled exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_SetExcInfo()``
     - ``PyErr_SetHandledException()``
   * - Get raised exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_Fetch``
     - ``PyErr_GetRaisedException``
   * - Set raised exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_Restore``
     - ``PyErr_SetRaisedException``
   * - Construct an exception instance from the 3-tuple (C)
     - ``PyErr_NormalizeException``
     - N/A

The current proposal is a step in this process, and presents a way forward
for one more case in which the 3-tuple representation has leaked to the

> language. The motivation for all this work is twofold.

Author: I agree, will split out the rationale.

   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
   ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

These ``__exit__`` methods will also be called with a 3-tuple:

.. code-block::

   ...     def __exit__(self, typ, *exc):
   ...         print('__exit__ called with:', repr(typ, exc))
   ...
   ...     def __exit__(self, typ, exc, tb):
   ...         print('__exit__ called with:', repr(type, exc, tb))

A reference implementation is provided at [https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/101995].

When the interpreter reaches the end of the scope of a context manager,
and it is about to call the relevant ``__exit__`` or ``__aexit__`` function,
it instrospects this function to determine whether it is the single-arg
or the legacy 3-arg version. In the draft PR, this introspection is performed
by ``is_legacy___exit__``, whose code is included below.

It is important to note that this is not a generic introspection function, but
rather one which is specifically designed for our use case. We know that
``exit_func`` is an attribute of the context manager class (taken from the

> type of the object that provided ``__enter__``), so it is a function.

Author: ```suggestion
type of the object that provided ``__enter__``), so it is typically an unbound method.
```

PEP: 707

> Title: PEP 707: A simplified signature for __exit__ and __aexit__

Reviewer: Don't repeat number here:
```suggestion
Title: A simplified signature for __exit__ and __aexit__
```

Author: Irit Katriel <iritkatriel@gmail.com>
Discussions-To:
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Feb-2023
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History:
Resolution:

Abstract
========

> This PEP proposes to make the intrpreter accept context managers whose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes to make the interpreter accept context managers whose
```

``__exit__``/``__aexit__`` method takes only a single exception instance,
while continuing to support also the current ``(typ, exc, tb)`` signature
for backwards compatibility.

This change would remove a redundancy in the language which is
confusing for those learning and using it. In addition, it will remove

> some of the overhead of supporting context mamangers in the interpreter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some of the overhead of supporting context managers in the interpreter:
```

feature by supporting it only in non-ambiguous cases. In particular, any
signature that *could* accept three arguments, is assumed to expect them.

Motivation
==========

In the past, an exception was represented in many parts of Python by a
tuple of three elements: the type of the exception, its value, and its
traceback.  While there were good reasons for this design at the time,
they no longer hold because the type and traceback can now be reliably
deduced from the exception instance. Over the last few years we saw
several efforts to simplify the representation of exceptions.

Since 3.10, the ``traceback`` module's functions accept either a 3-tuple
as described above, or just an exception instance as a single argument
[https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/70577].

Internally, the interpreter no longer represents exceptions as a triplet.
This was removed for the handled exception in 3.11 
[https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/30122] and
for the raised exception in 3.12
[https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/101607]. As a consequence,
several APIs that expose the triplet were deprecated in favour of
simpler alternatives:

> list-table:: Exception Related APIs

Reviewer: This table isn't rendering, see the preview at https://pep-previews--3018.org.readthedocs.build/pep-0707/#motivation

   :widths: 50 25 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - 
     - Deprecated
     - Alternative

   * - Get handled exception (Python)
     - ``sys.exc_info()``
     - ``sys.exception()``

   * - Get handled exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_GetExcInfo()``
     - ``PyErr_GetHandledException()``

   * - Set handled exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_SetExcInfo()``
     - ``PyErr_SetHandledException()``
   
   * - Get raised exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_Fetch``
     - ``PyErr_GetRaisedException``

   * - Set raised exception (C)
     - ``PyErr_Restore``
     - ``PyErr_SetRaisedException``

   * - Construct an exception instance from the 3-tuple (C)
     - ``PyErr_NormalizeException``
     - N/A

The current proposal is a step in this process, and presents a way forward
for one more case in which the 3-tuple representation has leaked to the

> lanaguage. The motivation for all this work is twofold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
language. The motivation for all this work is twofold.
```

Simplify the implementation of the language
-------------------------------------------

The simplification gained by reducing the handled exception to a single
object was significant. Previously, the interpreter needed to push onto/pop
from the stack three items whenever it did anything with exceptions.
This increased stack depth (adding pressure on caches and registers) and
complicated some of the bytecodes. Reducing this to one item reduced the
code of ceval.c (the interpreter's eval loop implementation) by about 100
lines [https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/30122], and it was later
followed by the removal of the ``POP_EXCEPT_AND_RERAISE`` opcode which has
become simple enough to be replaced by generic stack manipulation instructions

> [https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/90360].  Micro-bencmarks showed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/90360].  Micro-benchmarks showed
```

a speedup of about 10% for catching and raising an exception, as well as
for creating generators
[https://github.com/faster-cpython/ideas/issues/106#issuecomment-990172363].
To summarize, removing this redundancy in Python's internals simplified the
interpreter and made it faster.

The performance of invoking ``__exit__``/``__aexit__`` when leaving
a context manager can be also improved by replacing a multi-arg function

> call by a single-arg one. Micro-benchmarks showed that entering and exiting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
call with a single-arg one. Micro-benchmarks showed that entering and exiting
```

a context manager with single-arg ``__exit__`` is about 13% faster.

> Simplify the lanaguage itself
> ------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simplify the lanaguage itself
-----------------------------
```

One of the reasons for the popularity of Python is its simplicity. The
``sys.exc_info()`` triplet is cryptic for new learners, and the redundancy
in it is confusing for those who do understand it.

The only reason to object today to the removal of the last remaining
appearances of the 3-tuple from the language is the concerns about

> disrution that such changes can bring. The goal of this PEP is to propose

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
disruption that such changes can bring. The goal of this PEP is to propose
```

   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
   ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

These ``__exit__`` methods will also be called with a 3-tuple:

.. code-block::

   ...     def __exit__(self, typ, *exc):
   ...         print('__exit__ called with:', repr(typ, exc))
   ...
   ...     def __exit__(self, typ, exc, tb):
   ...         print('__exit__ called with:', repr(type, exc, tb))

A reference implementation is provided at [https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/101995].

When the interpreter reaches the end of the scope of a context manager,
and it is about to call the relevant ``__exit__`` or ``__aexit__`` function,
it instrospects this function to determine whether it is the single-arg
or the legacy 3-arg version. In the draft PR, this introspection is performed
by ``is_legacy___exit__``, whose code is included below.

It is important to note that this is not a generic introspection function, but
rather one which is specifically designed for our use case. We know that
``exit_func`` is an attribute of the context manager class (taken from the

> type of the object that provided ``__enter__``), so it is an unbound method.

Reviewer 2: Or some other callable (perhaps created by a decorator).

Author: I'll just say function (it's not any callable).

Reviewer 2: Non-function callables work:

```
In [1]: class Exiter:
   ...:     def __call__(self, *args):
   ...:         print(args)
   ...: 

In [2]: class X:
   ...:     def __enter__(self): return None
   ...:     __exit__ = Exiter()
   ...: 

In [4]: with X(): pass
(None, None, None)
```

Sorry for the nitpicky comment, I just have a feeling that silly edge cases like this could endanger the proposal.

Author: Ok I see what you mean.

> I just have a feeling that silly edge cases like this could endanger the proposal.

AFAIK perfect introspection is not possible, so there will be such edge cases (even if we make this one work). But the point is that they are limitations on new code, not something that breaks old code. So I don't know if they necessarily kill the proposal.

> type of the object that provided ``__enter__``), so it is an unbound method.

Author: ```suggestion
type of the object that provided ``__enter__``), so it is a function.
```

Furthermore, for this to be useful we need to identify enough single-arg forms,

> but not necesarily all of them.  What is critical for backwards compatibility is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but not necessarily all of them.  What is critical for backwards compatibility is
```

for context managers will include a section on the legacy signatures of
``__exit__`` and ``__aexit__``.

Reference Implementation
========================

`CPython PR #101995 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/101995>`_
implements the proposal of this PEP.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Support ``__leave__(self, exc)``
----------------------------------

It was considered to support a method by a new name, such as ``__leave__``,
with the new signature. This basically makes the programmer explicitly declare
which signature they are intending to use, and avoid the need for introspection.
I don't think this solution has benefits that justify the addition of a new
dunder name.

Support ``__leave__(self, exc)``, with trampolines
----------------------------------------------------

An enhancement of the previous idea that seems to promise a smoother migration
was to add ``__leave__``, and make sure that any type that defines ``__leave__``
or ``__exit__`` is augmented with a builtin version of the other. The builtin
``__leave__`` calls ``__exit__``, and the builtin ``__exit__`` calls ``__leave__``.

This became very complicated when it came to making it work for direct calls to

> a superclass::
> 
> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer: Either use the `::` shortcut or the explicit `.. code-block:: python`, not both:

https://pep-previews--3018.org.readthedocs.build/pep-0707/#support-leave-self-exc-with-trampolines

```suggestion
a superclass::
```

   class B:
      def __enter__(self):
         pass

      def __leave__(self, exc):
       print('B.__leave__:', repr(exc), type(exc))

   class D(B):
      def __exit__(self, typ, val, tb):
         print('D.__exit__:', type, val, tb)
         B.__exit__(self, type, val, tb)

   e = TypeError(42)
   D().__exit__(type(e), e, e.__traceback__)

To make this work, the automatically added methods need to be returned as
decorators that freeze the type from which the method is to be looked up
(we want ``B.__exit__`` to call ``B.__leave__``, not ``D.__leave__``).
This solution seems much more complicated to implement than the introspection
proposed in this PEP.

> References
> ==========
> 
> .. [1] 
> .. [2] 
> .. [3] 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To fix warnings:
```
/home/runner/work/peps/peps/pep-0707.rst:339: WARNING: Footnote [1] is not referenced.
/home/runner/work/peps/peps/pep-0707.rst:340: WARNING: Footnote [2] is not referenced.
/home/runner/work/peps/peps/pep-0707.rst:341: WARNING: Footnote [3] is not referenced.
```

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

> 
> 
> ..
>     Local Variables:
>     mode: indented-text
>     indent-tabs-mode: nil
>     sentence-end-double-space: t
>     fill-column: 70
>     coding: utf-8
>     End:

Reviewer: These old emacs things are no longer needed. 

```suggestion
```

Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Feb-2023
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History:
Resolution:

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to make the interpreter accept context managers whose
:meth:`py3.11:~object.__exit__` / :meth:`py3.11:~object.__aexit__` method
takes only a single exception instance,
while continuing to also support the current ``(typ, exc, tb)`` signature
for backwards compatibility.

This proposal is part of an ongoing effort to remove from the language
the redundancy of the 3-item exception representation, a relic of earlier
Python versions which now confuses language users while adding complexity
and overhead to the interpreter.

The proposed implementation uses introspection, which is tailored to the
requirements of this use case. The solution ensures the safety of the new
feature by supporting it only in non-ambiguous cases. In particular, any
signature that *could* accept three arguments is assumed to expect them.

Because reliable introspection of callables is not currently possible in
Python, the solution proposed here is limited in that only the common types
of single-arg callables will be identified as such, while some of the more

> esoteric ones will conttinue to be called with three arguments. This

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
esoteric ones will continue to be called with three arguments. This
```

complicated some of the bytecodes. Reducing this to one item
`removed about 100 lines of code <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/30122>`_
from ``ceval.c`` (the interpreter's eval loop implementation), and it was later
followed by the removal of the ``POP_EXCEPT_AND_RERAISE`` opcode which has
become simple enough to be `replaced by generic stack manipulation instructions
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/90360>`_.  Micro-benchmarks showed
`a speedup of about 10% for catching and raising an exception, as well as
for creating generators
<https://github.com/faster-cpython/ideas/issues/106#issuecomment-990172363>`_.
To summarize, removing this redundancy in Python's internals simplified the
interpreter and made it faster.

The performance of invoking ``__exit__``/``__aexit__`` when leaving
a context manager can be also improved by replacing a multi-arg function
call with a single-arg one. Micro-benchmarks showed that entering and exiting
a context manager with single-arg ``__exit__`` is about 13% faster.

Simplify the lanaguage itself
-----------------------------

One of the reasons for the popularity of Python is its simplicity. The

> :func:`py3.11:sys.exc_info`` triplet is cryptic for new learners,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:func:`py3.11:sys.exc_info` triplet is cryptic for new learners,
```

Fix one other typo from me that I hadn't yet added to the previous review before it was randomly submitted

``__exit__`` and ``__leave__`` around for 5-10 years with similar
function is not ideal, but it is an option.

Let us now examine the limitations of the current proposal. It identifies
2-arg python functions, and ``METH_O`` C functions as having a single-arg
signature, and assumes that anything else is expecting 3 args. Obviously
it is possible to create false negatives for this heuristic (single-arg
callables that it will not identify). Context managers written in this
way won't work, they will continue to fail as they do now when their
``__exit__`` function will be called with three arguments.

I believe that it will not be a problem in practice. First, all working
code will continue to work, so this is a limitation on new code rather
than a problem impacting existing code. Second, exotic callable types are
rarely used for ``__exit__`` and if one is needed, it can always be wrapped
by a plain vanilla method that delegates to the callable. For example, we
can write this::

   class C:
      __enter__ = lambda self: self
      __exit__ = ExoticCallable()

as follows::

   class CM:
      __enter__ = lambda self: self
      _exit = ExoticCallable()

>       __exit__ = lambda self, exc : CM._exit(exc)
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      __exit__ = lambda self, exc: CM._exit(exc)
```

Use conventional/consistent position of `:` and trim extra blank line

> While discussing the real-world impact of the problem of this PEP, it is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While discussing the real-world impact of the problem in this PEP, it is
```

Fix grammar to match intended semantics and avoid double "of"

worth noting that most ``__exit__`` functions don't do anything with their
arguments. Typically, a context manager is implemented to ensure that some
cleanup actions take place upon exit. It is rarely appropriate for the
``__exit__`` function to handle exceptions raised within the context, and
they are typically allowed to propagate out of ``__exit__`` to the calling

> function.

Reviewer 4: Maybe make a more explicit mention of how this actually impacts both the need for this PEP but also the backward-compat concern?

> function.

Reviewer 4: Maybe make a more explicit mention of how this actually impacts both the need for this PEP but also the backward-compat concern?

from the stack three items whenever it did anything with exceptions.
This increased stack depth (adding pressure on caches and registers) and
complicated some of the bytecodes. Reducing this to one item
`removed about 100 lines of code <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/30122>`_
from ``ceval.c`` (the interpreter's eval loop implementation), and it was later
followed by the removal of the ``POP_EXCEPT_AND_RERAISE`` opcode which has
become simple enough to be `replaced by generic stack manipulation instructions
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/90360>`_.  Micro-benchmarks showed
`a speedup of about 10% for catching and raising an exception, as well as
for creating generators
<https://github.com/faster-cpython/ideas/issues/106#issuecomment-990172363>`_.
To summarize, removing this redundancy in Python's internals simplified the
interpreter and made it faster.

The performance of invoking ``__exit__``/``__aexit__`` when leaving
a context manager can be also improved by replacing a multi-arg function
call with a single-arg one. Micro-benchmarks showed that entering and exiting
a context manager with single-arg ``__exit__`` is about 13% faster.

> Simplify the lanaguage itself
> -----------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simplify the language itself
----------------------------
```

One of the reasons for the popularity of Python is its simplicity. The
:func:`py3.11:sys.exc_info` triplet is cryptic for new learners,
and the redundancy in it is confusing for those who do understand it.

It will take multiple releases to get to a point where we can think of
deprecating ``sys.exc_info()``. However, we can relatively quickly reach a
stage where new learners do not need to know about it, or about the 3-tuple
representation, at least until they are maintaining legacy code.

Rationale
=========

The only reason to object today to the removal of the last remaining
appearances of the 3-tuple from the language is the concerns about
disruption that such changes can bring. The goal of this PEP is to propose
a safe, gradual and minimally disruptive way to make this change in the
case of ``__exit__``, and with this to initiate a discussion of our options
for evolving its method signature.

In the case of the :mod:`py3.11:traceback` module's API, evolving the

> functions to have a hybrid signature is relatively straighforward and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions to have a hybrid signature is relatively straightforward and
```

I believe that it will not be a problem in practice. First, all working
code will continue to work, so this is a limitation on new code rather
than a problem impacting existing code. Second, exotic callable types are
rarely used for ``__exit__`` and if one is needed, it can always be wrapped
by a plain vanilla method that delegates to the callable. For example, we
can write this::

   class C:
      __enter__ = lambda self: self
      __exit__ = ExoticCallable()

as follows::

   class CM:
      __enter__ = lambda self: self
      _exit = ExoticCallable()
      __exit__ = lambda self, exc: CM._exit(exc)

While discussing the real-world impact of the problem in this PEP, it is
worth noting that most ``__exit__`` functions don't do anything with their
arguments. Typically, a context manager is implemented to ensure that some
cleanup actions take place upon exit. It is rarely appropriate for the
``__exit__`` function to handle exceptions raised within the context, and
they are typically allowed to propagate out of ``__exit__`` to the calling
function.  This means that most ``__exit__`` functions do not access their
arguments at all, and we should take this into account when trying to

> assess the impact of different solution on Python's userbase.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
assess the impact of different solutions on Python's userbase.
```

to ``__exit__`` would have caused a ``TypeError`` exception to be raised,
and now the call would succeed. This could theoretically change the
behaviour of existing code, but it is unlikely to be a problem in practice.

The backwards compatibility concerns will show up in some cases when libraries
try to migrate their context managers from the multi-arg to the single-arg
signature. If ``__exit__`` or ``__aexit__`` is called by any code other than
the interpreter's eval loop, the introspection does not automatically happen.
For example, this will occur where a context manager is subclassed and its
``__exit__`` method is called directly from the derived ``__exit__``. Such
context managers will need to migrate to the single-arg version with their
users, and may choose to offer a parallel API rather than breaking the
existing one. Alternatively, a superclass can stay with the signature
``__exit__(self, *args)``, and support both one and three args. Since
most context managers do not use the value of the arguments to ``__exit__``,
and simply allow the exception to propagate onward, this is likely to be the
common approach.

Security Implications
=====================

> I am not awware of any.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
I am not aware of any.
```

I haven't signed the CLA, so you may have to make this edit locally to avoid adding me as a co-author and causing the CLA bot to freak out.

> I am not awware of any.

Author: ```suggestion
I am not aware of any.
```

context managers will need to migrate to the single-arg version with their
users, and may choose to offer a parallel API rather than breaking the
existing one. Alternatively, a superclass can stay with the signature
``__exit__(self, *args)``, and support both one and three args. Since
most context managers do not use the value of the arguments to ``__exit__``,

> and simply allow the exception to propagate on, this is likely to be the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and simply allow the exception to propagate onward, this is likely to be the
```

Clarify a minor wording issue

two drawbacks. The first is that it adds a new dunder name to the data model,
and we would end up with two dunders that mean the same thing, and only slightly
differ in their signatures.  The second is that it would require the migration of

> every ``__exit__`` to ``__leave__``, while with introspection it would not be

Reviewer 4: FYI, if you want, you _can_ also do

```suggestion
all ``__exit__``\s to ``__leave__``, while with introspection it would not be
```
